# Read Me

## JavaScript: Console Basics

### Objectives

- Familiarity with JavaScript syntax
- Use the JavaScript Console


### Resources

**Mozilla Developers Network**

- JavaScript
  - [Number](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Number)
  - [String](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/String)
  - [Math](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Math)

- Web APIs
  - [Console](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Console_API)
  - [Document](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Document)
  - [Window](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Window)


### Instructions

Open your Console in Firefox (or Google Chrome) and work through the following examples. If your console becomes too cluttered remember you can type `clear();` for a fresh start.

For each step, type in the command. Then go through the modifications below.

Write down your findings during this exploration for future reference.

If a solution or answer to a question eludes you, ask!

(Files have been provided to write code in. They are technically not necessary for this assignment, but perhaps you can give including these bits of code in the html file or the script file.)

**Never copy and paste code; always type it in by hand.**

---

1. `console.log("Hello");`

  Use `console.log();` to print a different message.

  Use `console.log();` to print a different message -- one which includes a possessive (i.e. Erin's cats' toys).

  Use `console.log();` to print the message you just typed, but enclose it with single quotes instead of double quotes. What happens?

  Let's fix this. Print the same message (again using single quotes), but place a slash (`\`) before each single quote (`'`) in the message. What happens?

2. `document.write("Hello");`

  Use `document.write();` to print a different message.

  Use `document.write();` to print a different message, one which requires a slash (i.e. Hack\Slash).

  Use `document.write();` to print the message you just typed, but enclose it with single quotes instead of double quotes. What happens?

  *Hint:* Read up on [escape notation](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/String).

  When you fix the statement from the last step, try creating output to the document using a new line and tab!

3. `window.alert("Hello");`

  Type `window.confirm("Do you like JavaScript?");`. How is this different from `window.alert()`? What value(s) does it return to the console?

  Type `window.prompt("What is your favorite programming language?");`. How is this different from `window.alert()` and `window.prompt()`? What value(s) does it return to the console?

  *Note:* `window.alert()`, `window.confirm()` and `window.prompt()` are not part of JavaScript. They are part of the "Window Object Model." We will get into object models later in class, but for now, you can see these are rudimentary ways to ask a user for input. (We will eventually ask users to input information through web page forms.)

4. Write a few arithmetic problems. Use addition (`+`), subtraction (`-`), multiplication (`*`), division (`/`) and modulo (`%`). Like in Algebra, computers follow 'order of operations.' If you want to have part of a calculation performed before another, group the statement using parentheses (`( )`).

5. `Math.sqrt(25);`

  Type `Math.PI;`.

  Type `Math.abs(-5);`. What does `abs()` do?

  Type `Math.round(4.56);` What does `round()` do?

  Try `Math.round(Math.PI);`.

  Now try: `var gas_price = 1.98765;` Hit enter. Then type: `Math.round(gas_price);`

  (As long as we feed Math numbers or representation of numbers, it should work!)

  Type `Math.random();`. Type it again. And again. One more time! :) What do you notice about the numbers generated by `random()`?

  **Enough Math! >:P** But the Math object is good to be aware of because sometimes we need to use it in programs.

6. The following steps use built-in methods which modify strings. We did not cover the concept of methods in class, but we will. Still, try writing these examples in the console and see how they work.

  Type: `"Hello".toUpperCase();`

  Do you think `.toLowerCase()` exists? Try it!

  How about `.capitalize()`?

7. `"cat".replace("t", "r");`

  Type `"sass".replace("s", "b");`. What is the result?

  Can you explain what `replace()` does?

  Type `"   Hello   ".trim();`. (*Note:* There are four spaces before and after the word 'Hello'.) What does `trim()` do?

  Type `"Hello, world!".length;`. (There is no `()` at the end.) What does `length` do?
